## File Permissions and Ownership
Understanding how to manage file permissions and ownership is crucial in Linux. This knowledge empowers you to control access to files and directories, ensuring the security and integrity of your system. Let's explore some essential commands and concepts related to file permissions and ownership.

In Linux, managing file permissions and ownership is vital for controlling who can access, modify, or execute files and directories. Understanding these concepts allows you to maintain the security and integrity of your system. Let's delve into the key commands and concepts related to file permissions and ownership.

## User, Group, and Others
In Linux, file permissions and ownership are categorized into three user classes: user, group, and others.

**User**: The user class represents the owner of the file or directory. As the owner, you have certain privileges and can control the permissions for yourself.

**Group**: The group class consists of users who belong to the same group as the file or directory. Group permissions define what members of that group can do with the file or directory.

**Others**: The others class encompasses all users who are neither the owner nor a member of the group. It specifies the permissions for any other user accessing the file or directory.

## Numeric Representation of Permissions
In Linux, permissions are represented using numeric values. Each permission (read, write, and execute) is assigned a numeric value: read (4), write (2), and execute (1). These values are combined to represent the permissions for each user class.

A user class is represented by "-". Hence, each hyphen in this example represent each user class "---". The order is;
- The first `"-"`  is the "user"
- The second `"-"` is the "group"
- The third `"-"` is "others"

Lets go into the details a bit more. 
- The number 0 represents no permission (---). 
- The number 1 represents execute permission (--x). 
- The number 2 represents write permission (-w-). 
- The number 3 represents write and execute permissions (-wx). 
- The number 4 represents read permission (r--). 
- The number 5 represents read and execute permissions (r-x). 
- The number 6 represents read and write permissions (rw-).
- The number 7 represents read, write, and execute permissions (rwx).
  
For example, if a file has permissions rwxr-xr--, it means:

- The owner (user) has read, write, and execute permissions (7). `rwxr`
- The group has read and execute permissions (5). `r-x`
- Others have read-only permissions (4). `r--`


## File Permission Commands
To manage file permissions and ownership, Linux provides several commands:

### chmod command
The `chmod` command allows you to modify file permissions. You can use both symbolic and numeric representations to assign permissions to the user, group, and others.

Lets see an example.

Create an emply file using the `touch` command

```
touch script.sh
```

Check the permission of the file 

```
ls -latr script.sh
-rw-r--r-- 1 dare staff 0 Jul  6 23:38 script.sh
```

### What do you think the permission of the above output represent?

Now lets update the permission so that all the user classes will have execute permission

```
 chmod +x script.sh
```

The above command uses the chmod command with the `+x` option to grant execute permission to the file `script.sh`. The `+x` option adds the execute permission to the existing permissions of the file. In this case, it allows the file script.sh to be executed as a script.

Now lets check what the file permissions look like

```
ls -latr script.sh
-rwxr-xr-x 1 dare staff 0 Jul  6 23:38 script.sh
```

The basic syntax for chmod follows this pattern:

```
chmod [option] [permission] [file_name]
```

Lets consider another example. Imagine the owner of a file is currently the only one with full permissions to `note.txt`. 

To allow group members and others to read, write, and execute the file, change it to the -rwxrwxrwx permission type, whose numeric value is 777:

```
chmod 777 note.txt
```

Check the output

```
ls -latr note.txt
-rwxrwxrwx 1 dare staff 0 Jul  6 23:53 note.txt
```

Now, notice the dash ("-") in the first position represents the file type and not a user class. It indicates that the entry is a regular file.

Here's a breakdown of the permission notation:

The first character represents the file type. Below is a list of all the file types you may ever come across:

- "-" indicates a regular file.
- "d" indicates a directory.
- "l" indicates a symbolic link.
- "c" indicates a character special file.
- "b" indicates a block special file
- "s" indicates a socket file.
- "p" indicates a named pipe.


##### chown command
The chown command allows you to change the ownership of files, directories, or symbolic links to a specified username or group. 

Here’s the basic format:

```
chown [option] owner[:group] file(s)
```

For example, lets assume there is a user on the server called **"john"**, a group on the server called **"developers"** and you want the owner of `filename.txt` changed from **"dare"** to **"john"**, and to also ensure that any user in the developer group has ownership of the file as well:

The command would look like below;

```
chown john:developer filename.txt
```

Check the output with `ls -latr` command on this file to then see the new changes.

# @fred or @jamiu please complete this step by providing the guide on creating a user and a group. 

#### **💡 Side Hustle Task ⏱️:**

- Create a group on the server and name it `devops`
- Create 5 users `["mary", "mohammed", "ravi", "tunji", "sofia" ]`, and ensure each user belong to the devops group
- create a folder for each user in the `/home` directory. For example `/home/mary`
- Ensure that the group ownership of each created folder belongs to **"devops"**




